[![Go Reference](https://pkg.go.dev/badge/gopkg.in/addrs.v1.svg)](https://pkg.go.dev/gopkg.in/addrs.v1)
![Checks](https://github.com/go-addrs/addrs/actions/workflows/go.yml/badge.svg)

# Overview

`addrs` provides IP address related types and data structures for the Go
programming language with a clean and complete API and many nice features when
compared with correspanding types in the Go `net` package. The basic types are
opaque, immutable, comparable, space efficient, and defined as simple structs
that don't require extra memory allocation.

One key difference which sets this library apart from others is that it
maintains a clear distinction between IPv4 and IPv6 addresses and related types.

## Immutable Types

The types described in this section are opaque, immutable, comparable, space
efficient and do not allocate memory. They can be used as map keys.

### Address

An `Address` does not store anything more than an IP address. Its size is 32
bits for IPv4 and 128 bits for IPv6 -- exactly the same size as when they appear
network packet headers. However, they are not stored as bytes in network order
and cannot be directly serialized as such. They can be converted to and from
their `net.IP` representation.

### Mask

A Mask is like an `Address` (same size) except that it must be in the format of
a (potentially empty) string of 1 bits in the most significant positions,
followed by 0 bits to fill out the remainder.

### Prefix

A `Prefix` is an `Address` plus a `Mask`. However, the mask is stored more
efficiently as a length indicating the number of 1s.

Any Address can be used with a `Prefix`. It is not limited to 0s where the
`Mask` has 0s. For example, `203.0.113.17/24` is valid and preserves the `.17`
at the end. If you need to mask off those bits, you can call `.Network()`.

### Range

A `Range` represents the set of all addresses between a first and a last address
(inclusive) and is store efficiently as such.

One thing to note is that there is no valid representation of an empty `Range`.
The API will not return one in any case and the zero value of a `Range` has one
address in it (`Address{}` - `Address{}`).

### Set

This is the immutable representation of `Set_`. See the full description below
under the mutable type section for more detail.

### Table

This is the immutable representation of `Table_`. See the full description below
under the mutable type section for more detail.

## Mutable Types

The two most complex types in this library have both mutable and immutable
representations -- `Set` and `Table`. The mutable types are marked with a
trailing underbar -- `Set_` and `Table_`.

Unlike the simpler, immutable types mentioned above, Memory for `Set`s and
`Table`s is allocated from the heap.

`Set_` and `Table_` behave like Go maps in a couple of ways:

1. They are reference types where each instance points to a shared data
   structure. Passing and returning them by value is efficient. Changes to any
   of the copies are reflected in all of them.

2. They must be initialized to be modifiable. An unitialized instance will
   behave like it is empty when you read from it but any attempt to modify it
   (e.g. insert entries) will result in a panic. Each provides a factory
   function which will return a fully-initialized instance which can then be
   modified.

There are a few ways in which these types do not behave like a Go `map`:

1. Converting between mutable and immutable instances is as efficient as copying
   a pointer. If you convert from mutable -> immutable -> mutable you end up
   with a mutable clone which is detached from the original, meaning
   modifications to it will not modify the original.

2. They are safe to read and write concurrently. All read operations work on a
   consistent representation of the underlying datastructure which is not
   affected by concurrent writes. However, subsequent reads on the same instance
   may -- depending on timing -- reflect concurrent writes from other
   goroutines.

3. Multiple concurrent writes *will* cause a panic.

A nice pattern to ensure consistency is to reserve writing to a single goroutine
and then send fixed `Set`s or `Table`s through channels to other goroutines to
consume it.

### Set_

A `Set` contains any arbitrary collection of individual, distinct `Address`
values. `Address`, `Prefix`, and `Range` are similar to sets but are more
constrained. The API provides methods to convert freely between these types.

`Set`s are immutable and `Set_`s are mutable. A fixed `Set` can be efficiently
obtained by calling `.Set()` on an `Address`, `Prefix`, `Range`, or `Set_`. A
mutable `Set_` can be obtained by calling `.Set_()` on a `Set`.

The memory required to store a `Set` is proportional to the minimum number of
minimal length `Prefix`es required to exactly cover all of its `Address`es. This
proportionality is maintained as modifications occur. For example,
subsequentially inserting two equally sized, and properly aligned `Prefix`es
will result in changes to the underlying structure to represent them both with a
single `Prefix`. It can get arbitrarily complicated and this will hold true.

The above is especially important when it comes to storing IPv6 addresses. For
example, an entire `/64` `Prefix` has a massive number of distinct `Address`es
but is stored in a very small space.

### Table_

A `Table` maps `Prefix`es to arbitrary values. They use Go generics so that any
type of value can be stored and retreived in a type-safe manner. Bits in the
`Address` part that would be masked off by 0s in the `Mask` are ignored when
using it as a key in a `Table_`.

`Table`s are immutable and `Table_`s are mutable. One can be efficiently
obtained a fixed table by calling `.Table()` on a `Table_` and vice-versa. This
requires go 1.18 or newer because it uses generics to map prefixes to any type
of your choosing.

At first glance, `Table` may seem similar but more restrictive than Go's `map`.
Afterall, a `Prefix` can be used as a `map` key so why is it necessary?

`Table` is more capable than Go `map` in a few very important ways besides the
ones mentioned above.

1. Walking a `Table` always orders the keys lexigraphically. Much like strings,
   shorter `Prefix`es come first followed by longer ones that it contains.
   `Prefix`es of the same length are ordered by their upper bits, up to that
   length.

2. It supports an efficient longest prefix match. When you search using a
   `Prefix`, it will return the entry whose key is closest to it (longest) yet
   still contains it.

3. It can convert itself to an aggregated form containing the minimum number of
   entries required such that any search using an `Address` as the search key
   will return the same value as it would on the original. (This operation
   requires that the values be of a comparable type, either by using a type that
   is inherently comparable with `==` and `!=` or by implementing a custom
   compare function to compare elements of the type you store in the map.

4. It supports an efficient diff operation so that you can iterate the entries
   removed, added, changed, or (optionally) unchanged from one to the other.

   Starting with a large `Table_`, if you make a small number of modifications to
   it and then diff the before and after snapshots, the diff operation
   efficiency will be very good -- proportional to the changes made between the
   two.

   The exception to this is if you pass a handler for unchanged prefixes. In
   this case, every prefix is always visited. This can be always be avoided by
   passing nil for the unchanged handler.
